Update the "Applications" page (#155)
IRL2/nanover-docs: source/concepts/applications.rst

============

The :ref:`NanoVer protocol <base-protocol>` defines how clients and servers
communicate with each other. It is designed to be extensible: it does
not define the content of a :ref:`FrameData <frame-description>`, the
meaning of the shared state keys, or the available commands. Each of these
can be defined and extended to support various **applications**. Each application
defines conventions for utilising the different services for specific objectives.

.. _multiplayer-application:

The multi-user application
---------------------------

The multi-user application provides a shared virtual space in which users can
embody themselves with "avatars" and manipulate objects (e.g the simulation box

> in MD).

Reviewer: What exactly does this mean? "e.g the simulation box in MD." 

Does it mean the scale/position in VR? It's not clear

Clients can broadcast avatar representations of themselves, information about

> their range of motion within shared space (useful for VR), and receive a server

Reviewer: What is meant by "range of motion"?

suggestion about how to position themselves relatives to other clients e.g.
:ref:`radially oriented <radial-orient>` for distributed setups.

Each user chooses a unique "player ID" for themselves to distinguish the
ownership and applicability of the user information shared. Commonly, clients
use a `UUID4
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier#Version_4_(random)>`_
to reduce the risk of collision between IDs produced by different clients.

.. _multiplayer-coordinate-systems:

Coordinate systems
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The multi-user application distinguishes between two coordinate spaces:

* The **server space** is the coordinate system of the shared virtual space.
  The 3d poses of avatars, the simulation box, and any other objects are
  exchanged in this coordinate space. The characteristics are chosen to match
  Unity's VR: left-handed, with Y-up, lengths expressed in meters, and the origin
  at floor level.

> * A **client space**, the local coordinate space of a client, may differ from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A **client space** is the local coordinate space of a given client, and which may differ from
```

Or something like this. Just to make it written in a consistent way with the previous bullet point.

  server space. For example, in VR the coordinate system may be fixed in physical
  space such that it can't be changed directly to match server space. The server
  is not aware of this and it is the client's responsibility to transform
  coordinates into server space before communicating them.

The client is free to represent the server space anywhere in its client space.
Optionally, the server can suggest to a client where to place and how to orient
the client space relative to the server space with the :ref:`user-origin
<user-origin-description>` key.

.. note::

   In MD applications there is an additional **simulation space** coordinate
   system. Its relation to the server space is determined by the position

>    of the simulation box (via `scene` key) and iMD interactions use this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   of the simulation box (via the `scene` key) and iMD interactions use this
```

   coordinate space.

.. _avatar-description:

Avatars
~~~~~~~

Users may share their presence in the virtual space by creating and continuously
updating an "avatar". For example, in the iMD-VR application, each VR client
shares their head and hand positions for others to see.

Avatars are exchanged via the shared state as a protobuf `Struct
<https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/reference/google.protobuf#google.protobuf.Struct>`_
under keys of the form ``avatar.<PLAYER_ID>``. This avatar Struct details the

> user's player ID, a name for the user, a display color, and the list of its

Reviewer: ```suggestion
user's player ID, a name for the user, a display color, and a list of its
```

spatial components.

.. warning::

   The avatar specifies its player ID twice: in the top level key and with the
   ``playerid`` sub-key. Both places MUST match. See `issue #98 in nanover-server-py
   <https://github.com/IRL2/nanover-server-py/issues/98>`_.

> The name is an arbitrary string typically displayed as a name tag to the other

Reviewer: What does "name tag" mean here exactly? Should this say something like: "The name is an arbitrary string that is displayed on the headset of the player's avatar, which is visible to other players in VR."

users. The color, intended for distinguishing multiple avatars easily, is provided
as a list of RGBA component values between 0 and 1.

The typical components are a head and two hands. An avatar can contain other

> components, but they may not be supported by other clients. Each component is

Reviewer: It might be good to state what the possible consequences of a client not supporting an avatar component might be. E.g., "An avatar can contain other components, but they may not be supported by other clients. For example, something like: "NanoVer iMD-VR only supports a head and two hands per avatar, which will be displayed to other players (see fig below). Any additional avatar components can be written in the shared state, but will not be rendered as objects in VR." I can share a screenshot of a NanoVer iMD-VR avatar to use as the figure. 

If you think this too specific, then we don't have to include it. It just might be nice to have an example of what not supporting a key means!

Reviewer 2: I have put it as "An avatar can contain other components, but they may be ignored and hidden by other clients." which I think should be sufficient.

   avatar.<PLAYER_ID>: {
     components : [
       {
         name,
         position,
         rotation,
       }
     ],
     playerid,
     name,
     color,
   }

.. _play-space-description:

Play area
~~~~~~~~~~

> A client, typically in the case of a VR client, can share a rough

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A client, typically in the case of a VR client, can share a 
```

I reckon get rid of "rough" here since the boundary shared by the client is well-defined (although it is only approximates the true space in which a player can move, but I'm not sure this detail is required? maybe more confusing to a reader).

> boundary within which the user can safely move. This is used to visually

Reviewer: ```suggestion
boundary within which that user can safely move. This is used to visually
```

> indicate the range of motion for each user, and is especially useful for

Reviewer: Is "range of motion" the correct wording? I commented further up on the page about what "range of motion" means, and I realise from reading this that is the area in which a given user can move in. Could we just say "play area"? We could add an admonition to define what a play area is

Reviewer: I'm happy to make this change myself, but I'll wait to hear what you think first

Reviewer: I'm happy to edit this myself, but I'll wait to hear what you think first @Ragzouken

colocated setups, or seeing the results of the :ref:`radial orient <radial-orient>`
function for distributed setups.

> The play area is defined as four points, each as a vector of 3 XYZ values, in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The play area is defined as four points, where each point is a vector of three XYZ values, in
```

> server space, that form a quadrilateral. The play area is defined as a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
server space that form a quadrilateral. The play area is defined as a
```

   Any client can add user-origin keys. If used without due care and
   responsibility a user in VR could get very nauseous.

As a summary, the user origin is specified as follows in the shared state:

.. code::

   user-origin.<PLAYER_ID>: {
     position,
     rotation,
   }

.. _multiplayer-update-index:

Update index
~~~~~~~~~~~~

If the client needs more precise knowledge of which of its updates have already
been received and rebroadcast to all clients, it can choose to maintain an
incrementing count of sent updates and store this in the shared state under
an ``update.index.<USER_ID>`` key. The client can then compare the remotely
received updates to this value with its internal count.

.. _trajectory-application:

The trajectory application
--------------------------

In the trajectory application, the server broadcasts molecular structures for
the clients to display. The molecular structures can be static structures or
snapshots of a trajectory; the protocol refers to these snapshots as frames. The
application is agnostic about the frames being generated on-the-fly or being
pre-calculated.

This application defines a set of fields to describe the semantics of molecular

> systems within the ``FrameData``. It also defines a set of optional commands a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
systems within the ``FrameData``. It also defines a set of optional commands that a
```

server can implement to give the clients some control over how the frames are

> streamed. Finally, it defines some interactions with the multiplayer

Reviewer: This sentence needs rewording, but I'm not sure what it means, so I can't make a suggestion

> 

Reviewer: In the sentence above, what does "if they are available" mean? If what are available?

Reviewer 2: I've removed this since it doesn't really communicate anything non-obvious ("if play area information is available, a client can display it how they wish")

.. note::

   Typically we assume that the points defining the play area are on the floor
   (Y=0), but this is not required.

.. _radial-orient:

Radial orient
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The radial orient feature is an command optionally implemented on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The radial orient feature is a command optionally implemented on the
```

:ref:`command service <command-service>`. This command suggests how clients

> should position their avatars relative to server space such that all clients

Reviewer: Is it only avatars or also the user's play space?

Reviewer 2: It's now "This command suggests how clients should position their client space (and hence avatars)"

are positioned in a circle around the origin. These suggestions are in
the form of a :ref:`user origin <user-origin-description>` for each avatar.

The command is named ``multiuser/radially-orient-origins``. It takes a

> ``radius`` argument that is the distance, in meters, between the generated

Reviewer: What are the "generate centers"?

   multiuser/radially-orient-origins(radius = 1.0) -> None

> Let a set of players :math:`P = \{P_0, P_1, ... P_{N - 1}\}`, :math:`N` the number of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's define set of players, :math:`P = \{P_0, P_1, ... P_{N - 1}\}`, where :math:`N` is the number of
```

> players, and :math:`r` the radius given as an argument. Then the center's position

Reviewer: ```suggestion
players, and :math:`r` is the radius given as an argument. Then the center's position
```

> :math:`\mathbf{C}_p` for avatar :math:`p` is computed using polar coordinates converted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:math:`\mathbf{C}_p` for avatar :math:`p` is computed using polar coordinates and then converted
```

> to Cartesian. Each avatar is assigned an angle :math:`\theta_p`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to Cartesian coordinates. Each avatar is assigned an angle :math:`\theta_p`:
```

.. math::

  \theta_p = \frac{ 2 \pi p}{N}

> Then each position is:

Reviewer: Position of what? Is it something like: "Then the position of the center of the server space in each avatar's play space is:"?

.. math::

  \begin{align}
  \mathbf{C}_p &= \begin{bmatrix}
    r\cos{\theta_p}\\
    0\\
    r\sin{\theta_p}\\
  \end{bmatrix}
  \end{align}

> The rotation :math:`\mathbf{R}_p` is expressed as a quaternion and is defined as:

Reviewer: Maybe continue this on from the previous sentence, to make it clear that it is the position and rotation of the same point in space.

.. math::

   \begin{align}
   \mathbf{R}_p &= \begin{bmatrix}
     0\\
     \sin{\frac{1}{2} \big(-\theta_p - \frac{2\pi}{N}\big)}\\
     0\\
     \cos{\frac{1}{2} \big(-\theta_p - \frac{2\pi}{N}\big)}\\
    \end{bmatrix}
   \end{align}

.. _user-origin-description:

User origin
~~~~~~~~~~~

> A user-origin is a suggestion to the client of how to position its coordinate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A user-origin is a suggestion to the client of how to position th client's coordinate
```

space (and therefore avatar) relative to server space. This is used by the
:ref:`radial orient <radial-orient>` server feature.

.. note::

   Any client can add user-origin keys. This can be used, for instance, to
   prototype alternatives to the radial orient feature without modifying the server.

The user origin describes where the server suggests a given user places the center
of its client space and how to orient it. The origin is described as a protobuf
Struct under the key ``user-origin.<PLAYER_ID>`` where ``<PLAYER_ID>`` is the ID
of the user to whom the suggestion is addressed. The Struct has the following keys:

> * ``position`` is the suggested location of the center for the user's client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``position`` is the suggested location of the center of the user's client
```

  space in the server space;

> * ``rotation`` is a quaternion describing the rotation of the user's client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``rotation`` is the quaternion describing the suggested rotation of the user's client
```

  space in the server space.

Clients are free to ignore the user-origin suggestion and locate themselves in
the server space as they choose.

.. warning::

   Any client can add user-origin keys. If used without due care and

>    responsibility a user in VR could get very nauseous.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   responsibility, a VR user could get very nauseous.
```

As a summary, the user origin is specified as follows in the shared state:

.. code::

   user-origin.<PLAYER_ID>: {
     position,
     rotation,
   }

.. _multiplayer-update-index:

Update index
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> If the client needs more precise knowledge of which of its updates have already

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a client needs more precise knowledge of which of its updates have already
```

> been received and rebroadcast to all clients, it can choose to maintain an

Reviewer: Why is this "rebroadcast?" Does it mean broadcast by the server and received by the clients? In which case, should it be "broadcast and received to all clients".

Reviewer 2: I have changed it to "accepted by the server and broadcast to all clients" -- it would be somewhat misleading to say that you can tell if other clients have received it or not

incrementing count of sent updates and store this in the shared state under
an ``update.index.<USER_ID>`` key. The client can then compare the remotely
received updates to this value with its internal count.

.. _trajectory-application:

The trajectory application
--------------------------

In the trajectory application, the server broadcasts molecular structures for
the clients to display. The molecular structures can be static structures or
snapshots of a trajectory; the protocol refers to these snapshots as frames. The
application is agnostic about the frames being generated on-the-fly or being
pre-calculated.

> This application defines a set of fields to describe the semantics of molecular

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This application defines a set of fields that describe the semantics of molecular
```

Frames
~~~~~~

The trajectory application uses the :ref:`trajectory service <trajectory-service>`,
which allows a server to stream snapshots of arbitrary data to clients. Each snapshot is
described in a :ref:`FrameData <frame-description>` object, which contains:

* a key-value map of protobuf `Values <https://protobuf.dev/reference/protobuf/google.protobuf/#value>`_
* a key-value map of homogeneous arrays

Here, we define a set of keys and data formats to describe the semantics of
molecular systems.

> .. note::

Reviewer: This note could do with rewording, maybe "A server using this set of keys can implement keys from another application as well. For instance, a server implementing the [iMD application](https://github.com/IRL2/nanover-docs/pull/155/files#imd-application) can implement both the trajectory-specific keys and [iMD-specific keys](https://github.com/IRL2/nanover-docs/pull/155/files#imd-framedata-keys).

All FrameData values used by the trajectory application use the following set
of units:

.. grid:: 3
   :gutter: 3

   .. grid-item::

   .. grid-item::
      .. list-table:: Units in NanoVer
         :widths: auto
         :header-rows: 1

         * - Quantity
           - Unit
         * - length
           - :math:`\text{nm}`
         * - time
           - :math:`\text{ps}`
         * - mass
           - atomic mass unit (AMU)
         * - charge
           - proton charge
         * - energy
           - :math:`\text{kJ}\cdot\text{mol}^{-1}`
         * - velocity
           - :math:`\text{nm}\cdot\text{ps}^{-1}`
         * - force
           - :math:`\text{kJ}\cdot\text{mol}^{-1}\cdot\text{nm}^{-1}`

   .. grid-item::

> The coordinate system is the right-handed, Z-up, system used in most software

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The coordinate system is the right-handed, Z-up system used in most software
```

Reviewer: Actually, should this sentence be here? Seems like it is out of place

  a name, set it to an empty string. When applicable, it is recommended to use
  the names used in the Protein Data Bank.

.. important::

   As the iMD application delivers system quantities separately from the interaction

>    quantities, the key ``particle.forces.system`` is now used in place of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   quantities, the key ``particle.forces.system`` has replaced the use of
```

>    ``particle.forces`` in iMD. The former contains the force array

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ``particle.forces``. The former contains the force array
```

   the use of arbitrary keys so users of the application can reintroduce this
   key, or any more appropriate ones, for their own use cases.

If the FrameData uses any key starting with ``particle.``, it must set the key
``particle.count`` in the value map. The value of ``particle.count`` is the

> number of particles in the frame, it must match the length of the arrays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
number of particles in the frame, and thus it must match the length of the arrays.
```

If the FrameData contains any array with a key staring with ``residue.``, it
must set a key ``residue.count`` in the value map. The value is the number of
residues and must match the length of the residue-related arrays. Indices in
the ``particle.residues`` array must be strictly less than the number of
residues. However, these indices may not refer to all of the residues. This
means it is possible to have residues with no particle attached to them. This

> allows to filter particles out without having to modify the list of residues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
allows us to filter out particles without having to modify the list of residues.
```

   is the potential energy of the system *excluding* the potential energy associated
   with iMD interactions.

.. note::

   As :ref:`mentioned for particle velocities <leap-frog-warning>`, some
   molecular dynamics integrators compute velocities that are out of sync with the
   positions. This may cause the kinetic and the potential energies to be out of
   sync as well, depending on whether the velocities of the system are corrected
   for by the physics engine before the kinetic energy is calculated. It is up to
   the user to determine whether this is an issue for the integrator they employ
   in their chosen physics engine, and whether it is corrected for in any way.

.. warning::

   In the current implementation of iMD in NanoVer, when using OpenMM as a physics
   engine for molecular simulation *with* a
   :ref:`leapfrog algorithm <leap-frog-warning>`, the kinetic energy delivered
   *during an iMD interaction* differs marginally from the true kinetic energy of the
   system (see `Issue #324 <https://github.com/IRL2/nanover-server-py/issues/324>`_).
   This is not an issue when using the ASE as the physics engine with an
   :class:`OpenMMCalculator`.

> Playback indicators

Reviewer: Should this be part of the next section?

Author: It seemed to make sense (at least to me) to put it where we define the kinetic energy key (as this is not mentioned in iMD). I'm open to suggestions though

-------------------

For now, the main application of NanoVer is interactive molecular dynamics

> (iMD) simulations, in  which a simulation runs on the server and users can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(iMD) simulations, in  which a simulation runs on a server and users can
```

apply forces to particles on-the-fly. The iMD application builds on the capacity of the
:ref:`trajectory application <trajectory-application>` to provide live molecular
dynamics by defining the means to perform real-time interactions with the
simulation.

The application defines how to send user interactions to the server, the
expected behaviour of the server regarding these interactions, and how the
server can communicate the result of these interactions on the simulation to
the clients.

A user sends an interaction as a point of origin (in simulation space),

> the particles to which it applies and any additional parameters (e.g force strength). The server, then

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the particles to which it applies and any additional parameters (e.g force strength). The server then
```

> collects all the user interactions, computes the corresponding forces and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
collects all the user interactions, computes the corresponding forces, and
```

capped to a maximum value specified by the user to avoid applying too large
forces.

Each interaction type also defines the equation for the potential energy associated
with the user interaction :math:`E_{\text{COM}}`. For mass weighted interaction, the
energy for the interaction is :math:`E = \frac{E_{\text{COM}}}{N}\sum_{i=0}^{N}m_i`.

> For non mass weighted :math:`E = E_{\text{COM}}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For non mass weighted, :math:`E = E_{\text{COM}}`.
```
